---
layout: post
title:  "Project Proposal"
date:   2023-02-22 16:55:56 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---
# Introduction / Background

New York City (NYC) is one of the largest and most populous urban cities in the United States, known for its high population density, frequent traffic congestion, and relatively expensive travel costs (1). As a cultural and economic powerhouse, NYC is well known for its particular yellow-cabs which serve as a primary mode of transportation for millions of residents and tourists every year. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in using machine learning algorithms to predict taxi fares, which can provide valuable insights for both passengers and taxi drivers (2). The ability to accurately predict taxi fares can help passengers plan their trips more effectively, while also helping taxi drivers optimize their routes and pricing strategies. This has led to a growing body of research focused on developing models that can accurately predict taxi fares in New York City. In this context, machine learning techniques have proven to be effective in providing accurate predictions, and are being widely used by researchers and industry practitioners to solve this problem

# Problem Definition

This model will seek to address existing datasets to produce a comparatively more accurate predictive model for taxi trip fares in New York City. The current taxi fare system in New York City is based on a meter that calculates the fare based on time and distance and any additional charges such as tolls and surcharges that may be implied during the peak travel times (3).  However, customers often complain about the unpredictability of taxi fares due to traffic conditions and other factors (4). Our goal is to develop a machine learning model that can handle all the factors that go into predicting accurate fares for different routes, traffic conditions and times of the day. 

# Methods / Algorithms to solve the problem

We are planning on using NYC taxi trip data to predict the fare amount for a taxi drive. This would involve training a model on the data using various supervised learning algorithms such as random forest or KNN and using existing packages and libraries such as scikit-learn. The given labels would be a few categories for how the fare changes based on the data. Parameters that may be analyzed in our model include trip distance, pick-up and drop-off locations, passenger count, and time.

# Potential Results and Discussion

- Reflecting updated inflation and price changes post-COVID
- Types of quantitative metrics to be used throughout the project

Although there are several predictive models for taxi fares in New York City that have already been implemented, the scope of this project seeks to address newer datasets that adequately reflect updated information regarding factors such as inflation, price changes, and the impacts on market demand following the Covid-19 pandemic. Additionally, recent municipal regulatory actions within the city have directly increased costs to riders, with changes toward the starting rates as well as the meter unit rates for yellow cabs. Such measures have been adopted to accommodate drivers who have been disproportionately impacted by increasing inflation and gas prices, according to some experts (6). Overall, such new conditions necessitate the development of newer models to predict yellow-taxi rates to provide more practical and accurate information. Some quantitative metrics of interest belonging to the relevant datasets include the date and time of each pick up, trip distances and durations, the total payment amount, and the tip amount for each trip, among others (5). By leveraging the relationships between such dimensions for distinct entries, it will become possible to implement machine learning techniques and algorithms that can flexibly respond to novel inputs. Additionally, it may become necessary to provide visualizations to elucidate the trends and patterns that emerge within the filtered dataset. 

# References

1. [Exploring the Impact of COVID-19 on Taxi Demand in New York City Using Machine Learning](https://www.proquest.com/docview/2672015744?pq-origsite=primo)
2. [New York City Taxi Trip Duration using MLP and XGBoost](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13198-021-01130-x)
3. [Yellow Cabs Are Struggling. Congestion Pricing Could Deal a New Blow](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/10/11/nyregion/nyc-traffic-yellow-cab-tolls.html)
4. [Everything You Need To Know About NYC's Taxis](https://www.thetravel.com/what-to-know-about-taxi-cabs-in-nyc-costs/)
5. [Predicting Taxi Tip Rates in NYC](https://cseweb.ucsd.edu//classes/sp15/cse190-c/reports/sp15/050.pdf)
6. [City Commission Raises Rates for Yellow Cabs, App-Based Rideshares](https://www.ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/news/2022/11/15/city-raises-rates-for-yellow-cabs-app-based-rideshares)

# Proposed Timeline
- By February 24 – Project Proposal
- By March 3 – Completed preprocessing data and dataset
- By March 13 – Trained first model
- By March 29 – Evaluated results with metrics
- By March 31 – Finishing touches on midterm report
- By April 19 – Trained second model
- By April 22 – Evaluated second model and compared both models
- By April 25 – Finishing touches on final report

# Dataset:

We will be using [NYC's TLC Trip Record Data](https://www.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page) to gather all necessary data, such as dates, location, distance, trips, and more. Since the data given on the website is using format .parquet, we will need to parse the data into an .csv file for further use. To achieve this, we can use pandas library in python and modify the .csv file to reflect changes.

We will be able to use Google Cloud AI Platform to estimate the taxi fare. We can use APIs like BigQuery API to import the dataset and train the model to calculate predictions and losses among other useful items.

This will allow us to compete with other submissions on kaggle since the previous submissions used old data (around 2015). The new data from NYC’s website will be more accurate and relevant to post-COVID time and will factor in inflated prices and make prediction based on it.

<a href="https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/new-york-city-taxi-fare-prediction/data">https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/new-york-city-taxi-fare-prediction/data</a>

# Work Distribution Chart

| Group Members | Responsibilities |
| --- | ----------- |
| Pratham Patel | Introduction/Background + 1 Reference |
| Alan Huynh  | Methods/Algorithms + GitHub Page + 1 Reference |
| Charles McCartney | Discussion + Intro Contributions + 1 Reference |
| Maharshi Patel | Proposed Timeline + Dataset + 1 Reference |
| Vedant Amin | Problem Definition + 1 Reference |
